Achieving Human Parity on Automatic
Chinese to English News Translation
Hany Hassan∗, Anthony Aue, Chang Chen, Vishal Chowdhary, Jonathan Clark,
Christian Federmann, Xuedong Huang, Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt, William Lewis,
Mu Li, Shujie Liu, Tie-Yan Liu, Renqian Luo, Arul Menezes, Tao Qin,
Frank Seide, Xu Tan, Fei Tian, Lijun Wu, Shuangzhi Wu, Yingce Xia,
Dongdong Zhang, Zhirui Zhang, and Ming Zhou
Microsoft AI & Research
Abstract
Machine translation has made rapid advances in recent years. Millions of people are using
it today in online translation systems and mobile applications in order to communicate across
language barriers. The question naturally arises whether such systems can approach or achieve
parity with human translations. In this paper, we first address the problem of how to define
and accurately measure human parity in translation. We then describe Microsoft’s machine
translation system and measure the quality of its translations on the widely used WMT 2017
news translation task from Chinese to English. We find that our latest neural machine trans-
lation system has reached a new state-of-the-art, and that the translation quality is at human
parity when compared to professional human translations. We also find that it significantly
exceeds the quality of crowd-sourced non-professional translations.
1 Introduction
Recent years have seen human performance levels reached or surpassed in tasks ranging from games
such as Go [33] to classification of images in ImageNet [21] to conversational speech recognition on
the Switchboard task [50].
In the area of machine translation, we have seen dramatic improvements in quality with the
advent of attentional encoder-decoder neural networks [35, 3, 39]. However, translation quality
continues to vary a great deal across language pairs, domains, and genres, more or less in direct
relationship to the availability of training data. This paper summarizes how we achieved human
parity in translating text in the news domain, from Chinese to English. While the techniques we
used are not specific to the news domain or the Chinese-English language pair, we do not claim that
this result necessarily generalizes to other language pairs and domains, especially where limited by
the availability of data and resources.
Translation of news text has been an area of active interest in the Machine Translation com-
munity for over a decade, due to the practical and commercial importance of this domain, the
availability of abundant parallel data on the web (at least in the most popular languages) and a
long history of government-funded projects and evaluation campaigns, such as NIST-OpenMT1
and GALE2. The annual evaluation campaign of the WMT (Conference on Machine Translation)
[6], has also focused on news translation for more than a decade.
Defining and measuring human quality in translation is challenging for a number of reasons.
Traditional metrics of translation quality, such as BLEU [29], TER [34] and Meteor [10] mea-
sure translation quality by comparison with one or more human reference translations. However,
the same source sentence can be translated in sometimes substantially different but equally cor-
rect ways. This makes reference-based evaluation nearly useless in determining quality of human
translations or near-human-quality machine translations.
∗Corresponding author: hanyh@microsoft.com
1https://www.nist.gov/itl/iad/mig/open-machine-translation-evaluation
2https://www.nist.gov/itl/iad/mig/machine-translation-evaluation-gale
1
8102
nuJ
92
]LC.sc[
2v76550.3081:viXra
Further complicating matters, we find that the quality of reference translations, long assumed
to be "gold" annotations by professional translators, are sometimes of remarkably poor quality.
This is because references are often crowd-sourced (either directly, or indirectly through translation
vendors). We have observed that crowd workers often use on-line MT with or without post-editing,
rather than translating from scratch. Furthermore, many crowd workers appear to have only a
rudimentary grasp of one of the languages, which often leads to unacceptable translation quality.
In Section 2, we describe how we address these challenges in defining and measuring human
quality. In Section 3, we describe our system architecture. Section 4 describes our data and
experiments. Sections 5 and 6 present our evaluation results and analysis.
2 Human Parity on Translation
Achieving human parity for machine translation is an important milestone of machine translation
research. However, the idea of computers achieving human quality level is generally considered
unattainable and triggers negative reactions from the research community and end users alike. This
is understandable, as previous similar announcements have turned out to be overly optimistic.
Before any meaningful discussion of human parity can occur, we require a rigorous definition
of the concept of human parity for translation. Based on this theoretical definition we can then
investigate how close neural machine translation is to this goal.
2.1 Defining Human Parity
Intuitively, we can define human parity for translation as follows:
Definition 1. If a bilingual human judges the quality of a candidate translation produced by a
human to be equivalent to one produced by a machine, then the machine has achieved human
parity.
Assuming that it is possible for humans to measure translation quality by assigning scores to
translations of individual sentences of a test set, and generalizing from a single sentence to a set
of test sentences, this effectively yields the following statistical definition:
Definition 2. If there is no statistically significant difference between human quality scores for a
test set of candidate translations from a machine translation system and the scores for the corre-
sponding human translations then the machine has achieved human parity.
We choose definition 2 to address the question of human parity for machine translation in a
fair and principled way. Given a reliable scoring metric to determine translation quality, based
on direct human assessment, one can use a paired statistical significance test to decide whether a
given machine translation system can be considered at parity with human translation quality for
a test set and corresponding human references.
It is important to note that this definition of human parity does not imply that the machine
translation system outperforms the human benchmark, but rather that its quality is statistically
indistinguishable. It also does not imply that the translation is error-free. Machines, like humans,
will continue to make mistakes.
Finally, achieving human parity on a given test set is measured with respect to a specific set of
benchmark human translations and does not automatically generalize to other domains or language
pairs.
2.2 Judging Human Parity
Our operational definition of human parity requires that human annotators be used to judge
translation quality. While there exist various automated metrics to measure machine translation
quality, these can only act as a (not necessarily correlated) proxy. Such metrics are typically
reference-based and thus subject to reference bias. This can occur in the form of bad reference
translations which result in bad segment scores. Also, due to the generative nature of translation,
there often are multiple valid translations for a given input segment. Any translation which does
not closely match the structure of the corresponding reference has a scoring disadvantage, even
2
perfect human translations. While these effects can be lessened using multiple references, the
underlying problem remains unsolved3.
Therefore, following the Conference on Machine Translation (WMT17) [6], we adopt direct
assessment [17] as our human evaluation method. To avoid reference bias—which can also happen
for human evaluation4—we use the source-based evaluation methodology following IWSLT17 [7].
In source-based direct assessment, annotators are shown source text and a candidate translation
and are asked the question “How accurately does the above candidate text convey the semantics of
the source text?”, answering this using a slider ranging from 0 (Not at all) to 100 (Perfectly).5 As
a side effect, we have to employ bilingual annotators for our human evaluation campaigns.
The raw human scores are then standardized to a z-score, defined as the signed number of
standard deviations an observation is above the mean, relative to a sample.
The z-scores are then averaged at the segment and system level. Results with statistically
insignificant differences are grouped into clusters (according to Wilcoxon rank sum test [45] at
p-level p ≤ 0.05).6
To identify unreliable crowd workers, direct assessment includes artificially degraded translation
output, so called “bad references”. Any large scale crowd annotation task requires such integrated
quality controls to guarantee high quality results. In our evaluation campaigns for Chinese into
English, we observed relatively few attempts of gaming or spamming compared to other languages
for which we run similar annotation tasks (we do not report on those in the context of this paper).
In the remainder of this paper, direct assessment ranking clusters are computed in the same way
as they had been generated for the WMT17 conference, with minor modifications6.
3 System Description
3.1 Neural Machine Translation
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) [3] represents the state-of-the-art for translation quality. This
has been demonstrated in various research evaluation campaigns (e.g. WMT [6]), and also for large
scale production systems [46, 11]. NMT scales to train on parallel data on the order of tens of
millions of sentences.
Currently, State-of-the-art NMT [3, 35] is generally based on a sequence-to-sequence encoder-
decoder model with an attention mechanism [3]. Attentional sequence-to-sequence NMT models
the conditional probability p(y|x) of the translated sequence y given an input sequence x. In
general, an attentional NMT system θ consists of two components: an encoder θ which trans-
e
forms the input sequence into a sequence or set of continuous representations, and a decoder θ
d
that dynamically reads out the encoder’s output with an attention mechanism and predicts the
conditional distribution of each target word. Generally, θ is trained to maximize the likelihood on
a parallel training set consisting of N sentence pairs:
N
(cid:88) (cid:16) (cid:12) (cid:17)
L(θ) = logp y(n) (cid:12)x(n);θ
n=1
N T
= (cid:88)(cid:88) logp (cid:16) y (n)(cid:12) (cid:12)y (n) ,h (n) ,fatt (cid:16) fenc (cid:0) x(n) (cid:1) ,y (n) ,h (n) , (cid:17) ;θ (cid:17) (1)
t <t t−1 <t t−1
n=1 t=1
(n)
where h denotes an internal decoder state, and y the words preceding step t. At each step
t−1 <t
t, the attention mechanism fatt determines a context vector as a weighted sum over the outputs
3HyTER [12] attempted to solve this but did not achieve mainstream success.
4Results from both source-based and reference-based direct assessment collected for IWSLT17 [7] show that
annotators assign higher scores in the source-based scenario and that they are more strict with their scoring in the
reference-based scenario. This indicates that references do in fact influence human scoring behavior. Consequently,
bad references will affect human evaluation in a reference-based direct assessment.
5Co-author Christian Federmann, in his role as co-organizer of the annual WMT evaluation campaign, was
instrumental in developing the Appraise evaluation system used by WMT and also in this paper. He was not
involved in developing the systems being evaluated here, nor were the human benchmark references available to the
system developers. Hence, our evaluation was implemented in a double-blind manner.
6WMT17 implemented this using R’s wilcox.test(). Our implementation differs from this as the clustering has
been integrated into Appraise and uses the Mann-Whitney rank test [27] at the same p-level p ≤ 0.05, based on
Python’s scipy.mannwhitneyu(). For the purpose of determining if the difference between scores for two candidate
systems is statistically significant, both implementations are equivalent.
3
(cid:0) (cid:1)
of the encoder fenc x(n) , where the weights are determined essentially by comparing each of the
encoder’s outputs against the decoder’s internal state and output up to time t − 1. fenc is a
sentence-level feature extractor and can be implemented as multi-layer bidirectional RNNs [3, 46],
a convolutional model (ConvS2S), [16] or a Transformer [39].
Like RNN sequence-to-sequence models, ConvS2S and Transformer utilize an encoder-decoder
architecture. However, both models aim to eliminate the internal decoder state h . This side
t−1
steps the recurrent nature of RNN, in which each sentence is encoded word by word, which limits
the parallelizability of the computation and makes the encoded representation sensitive to the
sequence length.
ConvS2S utilizes a stacked convolutional representation that models the dependencies between
nearby words on lower layers, while longer-range dependencies are handled in the upper layers of
the stack. The decoder applies attention on each layers. ConvS2S also utilizes position sensitive
embeddings along with residual connections to accommodate positional variance.
The Transformer model replaces the convolutions with self-attention, which also eliminates the
recurrent processing and positional dependency in the encoder. It also utilizes multi-head attention,
which allows to attend to multiple source positions at once, in order to model different types of
dependencies regardless of position. Similar to ConvS2S, the Transformer model utilizes positional
embeddings to compensate for the ordering information, though it proposes a non-parametric
representation. While these models eliminate recurrence in the encoder, all models discussed
above decode auto-regressively, where each output word’s distribution is conditioned on previously
generated outputs. The Transformer model has shown [39] to yield significant improvement and
therefore was choses as the base for our work in this paper.
3.2 Reaching Human Parity
Despite immense progress on NMT in the research community over the past years, human parity
has remained out of reach. In this paper, we describe our efforts to achieve human parity on large-
scale datasets for a Chinese-English news translation task. We address a number of limitations of
the current NMT paradigm. Our contributions are:
• We utilize the duality of the translation problem to allow the model to learn from both
source-to-target and target-to-source translations. Simultaneously this allows us to learn
from both supervised and unsupervised source and target data. This will be described in
Section 3.3. Specifically, we utilize a generic Dual Learning approach [20, 48, 47] (Section
3.3.1), and introduce a joint training algorithm to enhance the effect of monolingual source
and target data by iteratively boosting the source-to-target and target-to-source translation
models in a unified framework (Section 3.3.2).
• NMT systems decode auto-regressively from left-to-right, which means that during sequential
generation of the output, previous errors will be amplified and may mislead subsequent
generation. This is only partially remedied by beam search. We propose two approaches
to alleviate this problem: Deliberation Networks [49] is a method to refine the translation
based on two-pass decoding (Section 3.4.1); and a new training objective over two Kullback-
Leibler (KL) divergence regularization terms encourages agreement between left-to-right and
right-to-left decoding results (Section 3.4.2).
• Since NMT is very vulnerable to noisy training data, rare occurrences in the data, and the
training data quality in general [4]. We discuss our approaches for data selection and filtering,
including a cross-lingual sentence representation, in Section 3.5.
• Finally, we find that our systems are quite complementary, and can therefore benefit greatly
from system combination, ultimately attaining human parity. See section 3.6.
In this work, we interchangeably use source-to-target and (Zh→En) to denote Chinese-to-
English; target-to-source and (En→Zh) to denote English-to-Chinese.
3.3 Exploiting the Dual Nature of Translation
We leverage the duality of the translation problem to allow the model to learn from both source-to-
target and target-to-source translations. We explore the translation duality using two approaches:
Dual Learning 3.3.1 and Joint Training 3.3.2
4
3.3.1 Dual Learning for NMT
Dual learning [20, 48, 47], a recently proposed learning paradigm, tries to achieve the co-growth of
machine learning models in two dual tasks, such as image classification vs. image generation, speech
recognition vs. text-to-speech, and Chinese to English vs. English to Chinese translation. In dual
learning, the two parallel models (referred to as the primal model and the dual model) enhance
each other by leveraging primal-dual structure in order to learn from unlabeled data or regularize
the learning from labeled data. Ever since dual learning was proposed, it has been successfully
applied to various real-world problems such as question answering [36], image classification [48],
image segmentation [26], image to image translation [51, 53, 25], face attribute manipulation [32],
and machine translation [20, 44, 24, 1].
In this work, to achieve strong machine translation performance, we combine two different dual
learning methods that respectively enhance the usage of monolingual and bilingual training data.
We set the Chinese to English (Zh→En) translation model as the primal model and the English to
Chinese (En→Zh) model as the dual model, respectively denoted as p(y|x;θ ) and p(x|y;θ ).
x→y y→x
• Dual unsupervised learning (DUL) [20]. To enhance the Zh→En translation quality, DUL
efficiently leverages a monolingual Chinese corpus based on additional supervision signals
from the dual En→Zh model. Concretely speaking, for a monolingual Chinese sentence x, an
English translation y is sampled using the primal model p(·|x;θ ); starting from y, we use
x→y
the dual model p(·|y;θ ) to compute the log-likelihood logp(x|y;θ ) of reconstructing
y→x y→x
x from y and treat it as the reward of taking action y at state x. We would like to maximize
the expected reconstruction log-likelihood when iterating over all possible translation y for
x, shown as:
(cid:8) (cid:9) (cid:88)
L(x;θ ) = E logp(x|y;θ ) = p(y|x;θ )logp(x|y;θ ) (2)
x→y y∼p(·|x;θ ) y→x x→y y→x
x→y
y
Taking the gradient of L(x;θ ) with respect to θ , we obtain:
x→y x→y
∂L(x;θ ) (cid:88) ∂p(y|x;θ )
x→y x→y
= logp(x|y;θ )
y→x
∂θ ∂θ
x→y x→y
y
(3)
(cid:88) ∂ logp(y|x;θ )
x→y
= p(y|x;θ ) logp(x|y;θ )
x→y y→x
∂θ
x→y
y
Since summing over all possible y in the above equation is computationally intractable, we
use Monte Carlo sampling to approximate the above expectation:
∂L(x;θ ) ∂ logp(y(cid:48)|x;θ )
x→y ≈ x→y logp(x|y(cid:48);θ ), (4)
y→x
∂θ ∂θ
x→y x→y
where y(cid:48) is a sampled translation from the primal model p(·|x;θ ).
x→y
The approximated gradient is used to update the primal model parameters θ . Note that
x→y
the parameters of the dual model θ can be updated using a monolingual English corpus in
y→x
a similar way by maximizing the reconstruction likelihood from possible Chinese translations.
• Dual supervised learning (DSL) [48]. Unlike DUL, which aims to effectively leverage mono-
lingual data, DSL is an approach to better utilize bilingual training data by enhancing prob-
abilistic correlations within the two models. The idea of DSL is to force the joint probability
consistency within primal model and dual model. Specifically, for a bilingual sentence pair
(x,y), ideally we have p(x,y) = p(x)p(y|x) = p(y)p(x|y). However, if the two models are
trained separately, it is hard for them to satisfy p(x)p(y|x) = p(y)p(x|y). Therefore, when
applied in neural machine translation, DSL conducts joint training of the two models and
introduces an additional loss term on the parallel data (x,y) for regularization:
L = (logpˆ(x) + logp(y|x;θ ) − logpˆ(y) − logp(x|y;θ ))2, (5)
DSL x→y y→x
where pˆ(x) and pˆ(y) are empirical marginal distributions induced by the training data. In
our experiments, they are the output scores of two language models respectively trained on
Chinese and English corpus containing both bilingual and monolingual data.
5
In our architecture, both DUL and DSL are used in model training, both of which are applied
to the monolingual and bilingual training corpora.
3.3.2 Joint Training of Source-to-Target and Target-to-Source Models
Back translation [30] augments relatively scarce parallel data with plentiful monolingual data,
allowing us to train source-to-target (S2T) models with the help of target-to-source (T2S) models.
Specifically, given a set of sentences {y(t)} in the target language, a pre-constructed T2S translation
system is used to automatically generate translations {x(t)} in the source language. These synthetic
sentence pairs {(x(t),y(t))} are combined with the original bilingual data when training the S2T
NMT model. In order to leverage both source and target language monolingual data, and also
let S2T and T2S models help each other, we leverage the joint training method described in [52]
to optimize them by extending the back-translation method. The joint training method uses the
monolingual data and updates NMT models through several iterations.
Given parallel corpus D = {(x(n),y(n))}N and target monolingual corpus Y = {y(t)}T , a
n=1 t=1
semi-supervised training objective is used to jointly maximize the likelihood of both bilingual data
and monolingual data:
N T
(cid:88) (cid:88)
L∗(θ ) = logp(y(n)|x(n)) + logp(y(t)) (6)
x→y
n=1 t=1
By introducing x as the latent variable representing the source translation of target sentence
y(t), Equation 6 can be optimized in an EM framework, with the help of a T2S translation model:
N T
(cid:88) (cid:88)(cid:88)
L(θ ) = logp(y(n)|x(n)) + p(x|y(t))logp(y(t)|x) (7)
x→y
n=1 t=1 x
Similarly, we can optimize the T2S translation model with the help of S2T translation model
as follows:
N S
(cid:88) (cid:88)(cid:88)
L(θ ) = logp(x(n)|y(n)) + p(y|x(s))logp(x(s)|y) (8)
y→x
n=1 s=1 y
As we can find from Equation 7 and 8, model p(y|x) and p(x|y) serve as each other’s pseudo-
training data generator: p(x|y) is used to translate Y into X for p(y|x), while p(y|x) is used to
translate X to Y for p(x|y). The joint training process is illustrated in Figure 1. Before the first
iteration starts, two initial translation models p (y|x) and p (x|y) are pre-trained with parallel
0 0
data D = {(x(n),y(n))}. This step is denoted as iteration 0 for sake of consistency. In iteration
1, two NMT systems p (y|x) and p (x|y) are used to translate monolingual data X = {x(s)} and
0 0
Y = {y(t)}, which creates two synthetic training data sets X(cid:48) = {x(s),y (s) } and Y (cid:48) = {y(t),x (t) }.
0 0
Models p (y|x) and p (x|y) are then trained on this augmented training data by combining Y (cid:48)
1 1
and X(cid:48) with parallel data D. It is worth noting that n-best translations are used, and the selected
translations are weighted with the translation probabilities given by the NMT model, so that
the negative impact of noisy translations can be minimized. In iteration 2, the above process is
repeated, and the synthetic training data are re-generated with the updated NMT models p (y|x)
1
and p (x|y), which are presumably more accurate. The learned NMT models p (y|x) and p (x|y)
1 2 2
are also expected to improve with better pseudo-training data. The training process continues
until the performance on a development data set is no longer improved.
3.4 Beyond the Left-to-Right Bias
Current NMT systems suffer from the exposure bias problem [5]. Exposure bias refers to the
problem that during sequential generation of output, previous errors will be amplified and mislead
subsequent generation. We address this limitation in two ways: a two-pass decoding (Deliberation
Networks) 3.4.1 and Agreement Regularization 3.4.2.
3.4.1 Deliberation Networks
Classical neural machine translation models generate a translation word by word from left to right,
all in one pass. This is very different from human behavior such as, for instance, while writing
6
X= 𝑥 (cid:3046) D= 𝑥 (cid:3041) ,𝑦 (cid:3041) Y= 𝑦 (cid:3047) D= 𝑥 (cid:3041) ,𝑦 (cid:3041)
𝑃 (𝑦|𝑥) 𝑃 (𝑥|𝑦) 𝑃 (𝑦|𝑥;𝜃⃗) 𝑃 (𝑦|𝑥;𝜃⃖)
(cid:2868) (cid:2868) (cid:2868) (cid:2868)
Iteration 0 Iteration 0
𝑝(𝑦((cid:3046))|𝑥(cid:3046)) 𝑝(𝑥((cid:3047))|𝑦(cid:3047))
(cid:2868) (cid:2868)
X(cid:4593) = 𝑥 (cid:3046) ,𝑦 ((cid:3046)) Y(cid:4593) = 𝑦 (cid:3047) ,𝑥 ((cid:3047)) 𝐷(cid:4593) = 𝑥 (cid:3041) ,𝑦⃗ ((cid:3041)) 𝐷(cid:4593)(cid:4593) = 𝑥 (cid:3041) ,𝑦⃖ ((cid:3041))
(cid:2868) (cid:2868) (cid:2868) (cid:2868)
𝑃 (𝑦|𝑥) 𝑃 (𝑥|𝑦) 𝑃 (𝑦|𝑥;𝜃⃗) 𝑃 (𝑦|𝑥;𝜃⃖)
(cid:2869) (cid:2869) (cid:2869) (cid:2869)
Iteration 1 Iteration 1
𝑝(𝑦((cid:3046))|𝑥(cid:3046)) 𝑝(𝑥((cid:3047))|𝑦(cid:3047))
(cid:2869) (cid:2869)
X(cid:4593) = 𝑥 (cid:3046) ,𝑦 ((cid:3046)) Y(cid:4593) = 𝑦 (cid:3047) ,𝑥 ((cid:3047)) 𝐷(cid:4593) = 𝑥 (cid:3041) ,𝑦⃗ ((cid:3041)) 𝐷(cid:4593)(cid:4593) = 𝑥 (cid:3041) ,𝑦⃖ ((cid:3041))
(cid:2869) (cid:2869) (cid:2869) (cid:2869)
𝑃 (cid:2870) (𝑦|𝑥) 𝑃 (cid:2870) (𝑥|𝑦) 𝑃 (cid:2870) (𝑦|𝑥;𝜃⃗) 𝑃 (cid:2870) (𝑦|𝑥;𝜃⃖)
Iteration 2… … … … … Iteration 2 … … …
Figure 1: Illustration of joint training: S2T Figure 2: Illustration of agreement regulariza-
→− ←−
p(y|x) and T2S p(x|y) tion: L2R p(y|x; θ ) and R2L p(y|x; θ )
articles or papers. When writing papers, usually we create a first draft, then we revisit the draft
in its full context, further polishing each word (or phrase/sentence/paragraph) based on both its
left-side context and right-side context. In contrast, in neural machine translation, decoding in
only one pass makes the output of the t-th word y dependent on the source-side sentence x and its
t
left context only (i.e., already generated tokens {y ,··· ,y }), without any opportunity to look
1 t−1
into the future. Inspired by the human writing process, Deliberation Networks [49] try to overcome
this drawback by decoding using a two-pass process with two decoders as illustrated in Fig. 3. The
first-pass decoder outputs an initial translation as a draft. The second-pass decoder polishes this
draft into a final translation. The draft translation output from the first pass decoder contains
global information that enlarges the receptive field of decoding each token y in the second-pass
t
decoding process, and thus breaks the limitation of only looking to the left-hand side.
Second-Pass Decoder
𝑦 𝑦 𝑦 𝑦 𝑦 𝑦 𝑦 𝑦 𝑦
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Encoder
Microsoft Research Asia will celebratetwentiethanniversary of birth
𝑥 𝑥 𝑥 𝑥 𝑥 𝑥 𝑥 𝑥
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
微软 亚洲 研究院 即将 迎来 二十 周年 诞辰 First-Pass Decoder
𝑦′ 𝑦′ 𝑦′ 𝑦′ 𝑦′ 𝑦′ 𝑦′ 𝑦′
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Microsoft Research is about to have twenty birthday
Figure 3: An example showing the decoding process of deliberation network.
The detailed model architecture, with a deliberation network built on top of Transformer, is
shown in Fig. 4. As in standard Transformer, both the encoder E and the first-pass decoder D
1
contain several stacked layers connected via a self attention mechanism. Specifically, the encoder
assigns to each of the T source words a representation based on its original embedding and
s
contextual information gathered from other positions. We denote this sequence of top-layer state
vectors h as H. The encoder E reads the source sentence x and outputs a sequence of hidden
1:T
s
states H = h via self attention. The first-pass decoder D takes H as inputs, conducts
1:T 1
s
the first round decoding and obtains the first-pass translation sentence yˆ as well as the hidden
ˆ
states before softmax denoted as S. The second-pass decoder D also contains several stacked
2
layers, but is significantly different from D in that D takes the hidden states output by both
1 2
E and D as inputs. Specifically, denoting the output of the ith layer in D as si, we have si =
1 2
A (H,si−1)+A (S ˆ ,si−1)+A (si−1), where A and A are the multi-head attention mechanism [39]
e c s e c
7
connecting D respectively with E and D , and A is the self attention mechanism within D
2 1 s 2
operating on si−1. It is easily observed that the last translation result y is dependent on the first
translation sentence yˆ, since we feed the outputs of the first-pass decoder D into the second-pass
1
decoder D . In this way we obtain global information on the target side, thereby allowing us to
2
look at right context in sentence generation. Policy gradient algorithms are used to jointly optimize
the parameters of the three parts.
𝑦
𝒮 𝐴
𝑠
𝐴
𝑒 Second-Pass Decoder 𝓓
𝟐
Encoder 𝓔
ℋ
𝐴
𝑐
First-Pass Decoder 𝓓
𝟏
𝑥
𝑦ො
𝒮መ
Figure 4: Deliberation network: Blue, red and green parts indicate encoder E, first-pass decoder
D and second-pass decoder D respectively. Solid lines represent the information flow via atten-
1 2
tion model. The self attention model within E and the E-to-D attention model are omitted for
1
readability.
The combination of dual learning and deliberation networks takes place as follows: First, we
train the Zh→En and En→Zh Transformer models using both DUL and DSL. Then, for a target
side monolingual sentence y, the existing En→Zh model is used to translate it into Chinese sentence
x(cid:48). Afterwards, we treat (X(cid:48),Y ) as pseudo bilingual data and add it into the bilingual data corpus.
The enlarged bilingual corpus is then used to train the deliberation network as described above.
In deliberation network training, we use the Zh→En model obtained in the first step to initialize
the encoder and first-pass decoder.
3.4.2 Agreement Regularization of Left-to-Right and Right-to-Left Models
An alternative way of addressing exposure bias is to leverage the fact that unsatisfactory transla-
tions with bad suffixes generated by a left-to-right (L2R) model usually have low prediction scores
under a right-to-left (R2L) model. In the R2L model, if bad suffixes are fed as inputs to the decoder
first, this will lead to corrupted hidden states, therefore good prefixes reached later will be given
considerably lower prediction probabilities. This signal given by the R2L model can be leveraged
to alleviate the exposure bias problem of the L2R model and vice versa.
To train the L2R model, two Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence regularization terms are intro-
duced into the maximum-likelihood training objective, as shown in
N N
→− (cid:88) →− (cid:88) ←− →−
L( θ ) = logp(y(n)|x(n); θ ) − λ KL(p(y|x(n); θ )||p(y|x(n); θ ))
n=1 n=1
(9)
N
(cid:88) →− ←−
− λ KL(p(y|x(n); θ )||p(y|x(n); θ ))
n=1
With a simple mathematic calculation and proper approximation, we can get the parameter gra-
8
Algorithm 1 Unified Joint Training Algorithm
Input: Bilingual Data D = {(x(n),y(n))}N , Source and Target Monolingual Corpora X =
n=1
{x(s)}S and Y = {y(t)}T ;
s=1 t=1
→− ←− →−
Output: S2T-L2R Model p(y |x), S2T-R2L Model p(y |x), T2S-L2R Model p(x|y) and
←−
T2S-R2L Model p(x|y);
1: procedure training process
2: Pre-train four models with maximum likelihood on parallel corpora D = {(x(n),y(n))}N ;
n=1
3: while Not Converged do
→−
4: Build weighted pseudo-parallel corpora Y (cid:48) = {(x(t),y(t))}T with p(x|y) using mono-
t=1
lingual data Y = {y(t)}T as shown in Figure 1.
t=1
←− →−
5: Update P(y |x) and p(y |x) as shown in Figure 2, with original data D =
{(x(n),y(n))}N and synthetic data Y (cid:48) = {(x(t),y(t))}T .
n=1 t=1
→−
6: Build weighted pseudo-parallel corpora x(cid:48) = {(x(s),y(s))}S with p(y |x) using mono-
s=1
lingual data X = {x(s)}S as introduced in Figure 1.
s=1
←− →−
7: Update p(x|y) and P(x|y) as shown in Figure 2, with original data D =
{(x(n),y(n))}N and synthetic data X(cid:48) = {(x(s),y(s))}S .
n=1 s=1
8: end while
9: end procedure
dients for L2R model as follows:
→− →− →−
N N
∂L( θ ) (cid:88) ∂ logp(y(n)|x(n); θ ) (cid:88) (cid:88) ∂ logp(y|x(n); θ )
= + λ
→− →− →−
∂ θ ∂ θ ∂ θ
n=1 n=1 ←−
y∼p(·|x(n);θ )
(10)
(cid:32) ←− →− (cid:33)
N
(cid:88) (cid:88) p(y|x(n); θ ) ∂ logp(y|x(n); θ )
+ λ log
→− →−
p(y|x(n); θ ) ∂ θ
n=1 →−
y∼p(·|x(n);θ )
The first part tries to maximize the log likelihood of the bilingual training corpus. The second part
maximizes the log likelihood of the "pseudo corpus" constructed by the R2L model. The third part
maximizes a weighted log likelihood of another pseudo corpus generated by the L2R model itself
←− →−
with a weight of (log(p(y|x(n); θ )/p(y|x(n); θ ))) which penalizes the samples where the L2R and
R2L models do not agree. We find that the R2L model plays the role of an auxiliary system which
provides a pseudo corpus in the second part and calculates the weight in the third part.
Similarly, we can get corresponding parameter gradients for the R2L model by introducing two
KL divergence regularization terms, as follows:
←− ←− ←−
N N
∂L( θ ) (cid:88) ∂ logp(y(n)|x(n); θ ) (cid:88) (cid:88) ∂ logp(y|x(n); θ )
= + λ
←− ←− ←−
∂ θ ∂ θ ∂ θ
n=1 n=1 →−
y∼p(·|x(n);θ )
(11)
(cid:32) →− ←− (cid:33)
N
(cid:88) (cid:88) p(y|x(n); θ ) ∂ logp(y|x(n); θ )
+ λ log
←− ←−
p(y|x(n); θ ) ∂ θ
n=1 ←−
y∼p(·|x(n);θ )
With the help of the R2L model, the L2R model can be enhanced using Equation 10. With
the enhanced L2R model, a better pseudo corpus and more accurate weights can be leveraged to
improve the performance of the R2L model with Equation 11, while simultaneously this better R2L
model can be reused to improve the L2R model. In such a way, L2R and R2L models can mutually
boost each other as illustrated in Figure 2. The training process continues until the performance
on a development data set is no further improving.
Since both the source and target sentences can be generated from left to right and from right
to left, we can have a total of four systems, two source to target models: S2T-L2R (target sentence
is generated from left to right), S2T-R2L (target sentence is generated from right to left), and
two target to source models: T2S-L2R (source sentence is generated from left to right), T2S-
R2L (source sentence is generated from right to left). Using the agreement regularization method
described above, these four models can be optimized in a unified joint training framework, as
shown in Algorithm 1. With the joint training method, a weighted pseudo corpus is generated
by T2S-L2R model and used to train two S2T models (S2T-L2R and S2T-R2L) with the help of
9
agreement regularization. The enhanced S2T-L2R model is then used to build another weighted
pseudo corpus to train two T2S models. These four systems boost each other until convergence is
reached.
3.5 Data Selection and Filtering
Though NMT systems require huge amounts of training data, not all data are equally useful for
training the systems. NMT systems are more vulnerable to noisy training data, rare occurrences in
the data, and the training data quality in general. We are trying to tackle two different problems:
selecting data relevant to the task and removing noisy data. Out-of-domain and noisy data are
distinct problems and may harm the system in different ways. Many studies have highlighted the
bad impact of noisy data on MT, such as [4]. Even small amounts of noisy data can have very bad
effects since NMT models tend to assign high probabilities to rare events. Noise in data can take
several forms, including totally incorrect translations, partial translations, inaccurate or machine
translated data, wrong source or target language, or source copied to the target. We use features
from word alignment to filter out the very noisy data, similar to the approach in [19]. However,
data that is less egregiously noisy represents a bigger problem since it is harder to recognize.
The de-facto standard method for data selection for SMT is [28] and [2]. Unfortunately it has
not proved as useful for NMT; while it reduces the training data it does not lead to improvements
in system quality [38]. We propose a new approach that tackles both problems at once: filtering
noisy data and selecting relevant data. Our approach centers on first learning a bilingual sentence
vector representation where sentences in both languages are mapped into the same space. After
learning this representation, we use it for both filtering noisy data and selecting relevant data.
To learn our sentence representation we train a unified bilingual NMT system similar to [54]
that can translate between Chinese and English in both directions. We train this on a selected
subset of the data that is known to be of good quality and in the relevant domain. Building the
model with such relevant data has two advantages. First: it helps the representation to be similar
to the cleaner data; second: relevant sentences would have better representation than irrelevant
ones. Therefore we would achieve both data cleaning and relevant data selection objectives.
Recent progress in multi-lingual NMT i.e. [22] and [18] shows that these models are able to
represent multiple languages in the same space. However, we don’t use language markers because
we want to force the model to learn similar representations for both Chinese and English. Given
this bilingual system, for any sentence in Chinese or English we can run the encoder part of the
system to get a contextual vector representation for each word of a sentence. This is the vector
from the last encoder layer, normally used as input to the attention model. We represent each
sentence vector as the mean of the word-level contextual vectors.
Specifically, the encoder assigns to each of the T source words a representation based on its
s
original embedding and contextual information gathered from other positions. We denote this set
of top-layer state vectors as h :
1:T
s
(cid:0)
h = fenc E(x ),...,E(x )) (12)
1:T 1 T
s s
where EI ∈ RV×d is a look-up table of joint source and target embeddings, assigning each individual
word a unique embedding vector.
If henc denotes the encoder’s top layer’s output sequence, the sentence-vector representation
1:T
s
S of a given sentence S of length T is:
sv s
T
s
(cid:88)
S = henc (13)
sv (cid:96)
(cid:96)=1
A similarity measure SIM between any two given sentences S and T, regardless of their lan-
ST
guages, can be represented as the cosine similarity between their corresponding sentences vectors:
S · T
sv sv
SIM = (14)
ST
|S ||T |
sv sv
We train an RNN encoder-decoder system similar to [46] with 4 encoder layers with the first
layer being bidirectional and 4 decoder layers and an attention model. After training the model, we
run the encoder part only. Each resulting word context vector is composed of an 1024 dimension
vector; therefore the sentence vector (S ) representation is of the same size.
sv
10
For each sentence in the parallel training corpus, we measure the cross-lingual similarity between
source and target sentences as in Equation 14. We reject sentences with similarity below a specified
threshold. This approach enables us to drastically reduce the training data while significantly
improving the accuracy. Since we use a model trained on relevant data, this data selection technique
can serve a dual purpose by filtering noisy data as well as selecting relevant data.
3.6 System Combination and Re-ranking
In order to combine the systems described above, we combine n-best hypotheses from all systems
and then train a re-ranker using k-best MIRA on the validation set. K-best MIRA [8] is a version of
MIRA (a margin-based classification algorithm) that works with a batch tuning to learn a re-ranker
for the k-best hypothesis.
The features we use for re-ranking are:
• SY S : Original System Score and identifier.
Score
• LM : 5-gram language model trained on English news crawled data of 2015 and 2016.
Score
• R2L : R2L system re-scoring. A system trained on Chinese source and reversed English
score
target; the system is used to score each hypothesis.
• E2Z : English-to-Chinese system re-scoring. A system trained on English to Chinese is
score
used to score each hypothesis. .
• ST : Cross-lingual sentence similarity between source and the hypothesis as described in
SV
Section 3.5.
• R2L : R2L sentence vector similarity: the best hypothesis from the R2L system is com-
SV
pared to each n-best hypothesis and used to generate a sentence similarity score based on
sentence vector as above.
• E2Z : Back Composition sentence vector similarity. A round trip translation is done for
SV
each n-best hypothesis to translate it back to Chinese. Then we use sentence vector similarity
to measure the similarity between the original source and the recomposed source.
4 Experiments
In this section, we first introduce the data and experimental setup used in our experiments, and
then evaluate each of the systems introduced in Section 3, both independently and after system
combination and re-ranking.
4.1 Data and Experimental Setup
We use all of the available parallel data for the WMT17 Chinese-English translation task. This
consists of about 332K sentence pairs from the News Commentary corpus, 15.8M sentence pairs
from the UN Parallel Corpus, and 9M sentence pairs from the CWMT Corpus. We further filter
the bilingual corpus according to the following criteria:
• Both the source and target sentences should contain at least 3 words and at most 70 words.
• Pairs where (source length < 1.3∗target length or target length < 1.3∗source length) are
removed.
• Sentences with illegal characters (such as URLs, characters of other languages) are removed.
• Chinese sentences without any Chinese characters are removed.
• Duplicated sentence pairs are removed.
11
After filtration, we are left with 18M bilingual sentence pairs. We use the Chinese and English
language models trained on the 18M sentences of bilingual data to filter the monolingual sentences
from “News Crawl: articles from 2016” and “Common Crawl” provided by WMT17 using CED [28].
After filtering, we retain about 7M English and Chinese monolingual sentences. The monolingual
data will be deployed in both dual learning and back-translation setups through the experiments.
Newsdev2017 is used as the development set and Newstest2017 as the test set. All the data
(parallel and monolingual) have been tokenized and segmented into subword symbols using byte-
pair encoding (BPE) [31]. The Chinese data has been tokenized using the Jieba tokenizer7. English
sentences are tokenized using the scripts provided in Moses. We learn a BPE model with 32K merge
operations, in which 44K and 33K sub-word tokens are adopted as source and target vocabularies
separately.
4.2 Experimental Results
The Transformer model [40] is adopted as our baseline. Unless otherwise mentioned, all translation
experiments use the following hyper-parameter settings based on Tensor2Tensor Transformer-big
settings v1.3.08. This corresponds to a 6-layer transformer with a model size of 1024, a feed
forward network size (d ) of 4096, and 16 heads. All models are trained on 8 Tesla M40 GPUs
ff
for a total of 200K steps using the Adam [23] algorithm. The initial learning rate is set to 0.3
and decayed according to the “noam” schedule as described in [40].During training, the batch size
is set to 5120 words per batch and checkpoints are created every 60 minutes. All results are
reported on averaged parameters of the last 20 checkpoints. At test time, we use a beam of 8 and a
length penalty of 1.0. All reported scores are computed using sacreBLEU v1.2.3,9 which calculates
tokenization-independent BLEU [29].10
The first section of Table 1 shows the results for the baselines. First we compare with the
Sogou system [43], which was the best result reported at WMT 2017 evaluation campaign. Though
Sogou is an ensemble of many systems, we reference it here for comparison. The rest of the systems
reported in the table are single systems. Our baseline system, labeled Base, is trained on 18M
sentences. BT is adding the back-translated data to the baseline.
SystemID Settings BLEU
Sogou WMT 2017 best result [43] 26.40
Base Transformer Baseline 24.2
BT +Back Translation 25.57
DL BT + Dual Learning 26.51
DLDN BT + Dual Learning + Deliberation Nets 27.40
DLDN2 DLDN without first decoder reranking 27.20
DLDN3 BT+ Dual Learning + R2L sampling 26.88
DLDN4 BT+ Dual Learning + Bi-NMT 27.16
AR BT + Agreement Regularization 26.91
ARJT BT + Agreement Regularization + Joint Training 27.38
ARJT2 ARJT + dropout=0.1 27.19
ARJT3 ARJT + dropout=0.05 27.07
ARJT4 ARJT + dropout=0.01 26.98
Table 1: Automatic (BLEU) evaluation results on the WMT 2017 Chinese-English test set
Experimental Results of Dual Learning and Deliberation Networks
Our Dual Learning system consists of a Zh→En model and an En→Zh model, each adopting
the same model configuration as the baseline (Base). For the deliberation network, the encoder
and the first-pass decoder are initialized from the Zh→En model in the Dual Learning system,
7https://github.com/fxsjy/jieba
8https://github.com/tensorflow/tensor2tensor/blob/master/tensor2tensor/models/transformer.py
9https://github.com/awslabs/sockeye/tree/master/contrib/sacrebleu
10sacreBLEUsignature: BLEU+case.mixed+lang.zh-en+numrefs.1+smooth.exp_+test.wmt17/improved+tok.13a+version.1.2.3
12
and the second pass decoder share the same model structures with the first-pass decoder. The
evaluation results of the Dual Learning and Deliberation Network systems on WMT 2017 Chinese-
English test set are listed in the second section of Table 1. Dual Learning makes more efficient use
of the monolingual sentences and exploits the duality between Zh→En and En→Zh translation
directions. Based on system BT, the Dual Learning system DL achieves 26.51 BLEU, a 0.94
point improvement over the BT system, and outperforms the best ensemble result of 26.40 in the
WMT 2017 Chinese-English challenge . The Deliberation Network is further applied to the Dual
Learning system, which is denoted as DLDN. The Deliberation Network aims to improve sentence
generation quality by incorporating the global information provided by a first pass decoder. The
DLDN system further achieves a BLEU score of 27.40, a 0.89 BLEU score improvement over the
already strong DL system.
We also explore some variants of our DL and DLDN systems, denoted as DLDN2/3/4 in
the second section of Table 1. In DLDN, we use both the first and second pass decoders to rerank
the generated sentence and choose the top-1 result. In system DLDN2, we then remove this
reranking to see how the performance changes, yielding a 27.20 BLEU score, a 0.2 point drop. In
system DLDN3, we replace the Deliberation Network with R2L sampling. R2L sampling is a data
augmentation technique where we first train a Zh→En model that generates sentences in a right-
to-left(R2L) manner by reversing the target sentence in the training data, and use the R2L model
to sample English sentences given monolingual Chinese sentences. We can see that adding R2L
sampling to Dual Learning indeed brings BLEU score improvements, but performs worse than
the Deliberation Network. In system DLDN4, we further add Bi-NMT, which bidirectionally
generates candidate sentences in a single model, on the DL system and achieve 27.16 BLEU score.
Experimental Results of Agreement Regularization and Joint Training
Data enhancement has been shown to improve NMT performance. We proposed the agreement
regularization approach to explore data enhancement by using a right to left model to encourage
consensus translations. The existing back-translation method is also one of the data enhancement
approaches that leverages monolingual target data to generate synthetic bilingual data. Extend-
ing the back-translation approach, our proposed joint-training approach interactively makes data
enhancement by boosting source-to-target and target-to-source NMT systems. Eventually, the
unified joint training framework, denoted as ARJT, is used to integrate the agreement regulariza-
tion approach, the back translation approach, and the joint training approach to further improve
the performance of NMT systems. The evaluation results of the agreement regularization and the
unified joint training are listed in the third section of Table 1. Compared to BT, our agreement
regularization can achieve improvements of 1.34 BLEU points. Adding the joint training can bring
this up to a 1.81 gain.
We also explore several variants of our ARJT system, denoted as ARJT2/3/4 in Table 1.
We vary the dropout probability in order to explore the interaction between dropout regularization
and agreement regularization. Unlike ARJT, these variants don’t use the validation set for early
stopping.
Experimental Results of Data Selection
In addition to our results using the WMT training data, we also explore training our system
on a larger corpus. We experimented with 100M parallel sentences drawn from UN data, Open
Subtitles and Web crawled data. It is worth noting that the experiments reported in Table 1
were constrained data experiments limited to WMT17 official data only. While the experiments
reported in Table 2 are unconstrained systems using additional data.
First we apply word alignment heuristics to filter very noisy data. This filters out around 10%
of the data. Then we apply Cross-Entropy data selection [28] and [2] to order the sentences based
on their relevance to the CWMT part of the WMT data. We then select a specific number of
sentences pairs by rank.
In a separate experiment, we also apply the SentVec similarity filtering, described in Section
3.5, to select the same amount of data and measure its effect. We use a cutoff threshold of the
cosine similarity of 0.2. We train the unified bi-lingual encoder on a selected subset of the data
that is known to be of good quality and in the relevant domain, specifically, the CWMT data of 9M
13
sentence pairs. Since the system is trained to translate in both directions, it is effectively trained
on on 18M sentence pairs.
Table 2 shows the results of data selection. Base8K is using baseline data and back translated
data, however it uses a larger model architecture that we found to work better with larger data
sets. Base8K uses 6-layer transformer with a model size of 1024, a Feed Forward Network size
(d ) of 8192, and 16 heads. All models reported in Table 2 are trained for 300K steps with
ff
minibatch of 3500 on 8 GPUs. We average the last 20 checkpoints as before and decode with beam
size of 8 and length penalty of 1.0 similar to the setup above.
CED1 and CED2 add 35M sentences and 50M sentences respectively to Base8k. SV1
and SV2 added the same amount of data selected by SentVec similarity discussed in Section
3.5. SV3 and SV4 experimented with varying the dropout ratio to measure its impact with
the larger training data and model architecture. Generally the systems using SentVec similarity
filtering achieve improvements up to 1.5 BLEU points over Base8K and nearly 1 BLEU point as
compared to systems using the same amount of CED-selected data. We conclude that SentVec
similarity filtering is a helpful approach since it filters out noisy data which is hard to identify.
Since SentVec prevents data with partial and low-quality translation from negatively impacting the
system. Furthermore, the proposed approach helps select relevant data similar to CWMT data.
SystemID Settings BLEU
Base Transformer Baseline 24.2
BT +Back Translation 25.57
Base8K BT + 8K d 26.13
ff
CED1 Base8K + 35M CED + dropout=0.1 26.68
CED2 Base8K + 50M CED + dropout=0.1 26.61
SV1 Base8K + 35M + dropout=0.1 27.60
SV2 Base8K + 50M + dropout=0.1 27.45
SV3 Base8K + 35M + dropout=0.2 27.67
SV4 Base8K + 50M + dropout=0.2 27.49
Table 2: Evaluation Data selection results on the WMT 2017 Chinese-English test set
Experimental Results of Systems Combination
We experiment with system combination of n-best lists generated from various systems dis-
cussed above with 8 hypothesis from each system. We use various features to re-rank the systems
hypothesis as described in Section 3.6. As shown in Table 3, combining the set of heterogeneous
systems are complementary and achieved the highest results. We have experimented with many
configurations and features for systems combination, we found out that the most helpful scoring
features are: SY S , LM , R2L , R2L and E2Z . This is quite surprising since the
Score Score score SV SV
combined systems were focusing on modeling similar features. This may be due to the fact that
the models are learning complimentary features, so they have extra capacity for complementing
each other.
We think it would be useful to combine all proposed approaches in a single system. However,
we leave this as a future work item.
SystemID Settings BLEU
Combo-1 SV1, SV2, SV3 27.84
Combo-2 DLDN2, DLDN3, DLDN4 27.92
Combo-3 ARJT2, ARJT3, ARJT4 + 3 identical systems with different initialization 27.82
Combo-4 SV1, SV2, SV3, ARJT1, ARJT2, ARJT3, DLDN2, DLDN3, DLDN4 28.46
Combo-5 SV1, SV2, SV3, ARJT2, DLDN2, DLDN4 28.32
Combo-6 SV1, SV2, SV4, ARJT2, ARJT3, ARJT4, DLDN2, DLDN3, DLDN4 28.42
Table 3: System combination results on the WMT 2017 Chinese-English test set
14
# Ave % Ave z System
1 69.0 0.237 Combo-6
68.5 0.220 Reference-HT
68.9 0.216 Combo-5
68.6 0.211 Combo-4
2 67.3 0.141 Reference-PE
3 62.3 -0.094 Sogou
62.1 -0.115 Reference-WMT
4 56.0 -0.398 Online-A-1710
54.1 -0.468 Online-B-1710
Table 4: Human Evaluation Results for at least n ≥ 1,827 assessments per system show
that our research systems Combo-4, Combo-5, and Combo-6 achieve human parity according to
definition 2 as they are not distinguishable from Reference-HT, which is a human translation.
All our research systems significantly outperform Reference-PE, which is based on human post-
editing of machine translation output, and the original Reference-WMT, which is again a human
translation. # denotes the ranking cluster, Ave % the averaged raw score r ∈ [0,100], and Ave z
the standardized z score. n ≥ x denotes that we collected at least x assessments per system for
the respective evaluation campaign. This is referred to as Meta-1 in Table 5g.
5 Human Evaluation Results
Table 4 presents the results from our large scale human evaluation campaign. Based on these
results we claim that we have achieved human parity according to Definition 2, as our research
systems are indistinguishable from human translations.
In the table, systems in higher clusters significantly outperform all systems in lower clusters
according to Wilcoxon rank sum test at p-level p ≤ 0.05, following WMT17. Systems in the same
cluster are ordered by z score—which is defined as the signed number of standard deviations an
observation is above the mean, computed on the annotator level to address different annotation
behavior—but considered tied w.r.t. quality.
5.1 Human Evaluation Setup
As discussed in Section 2 our evaluation methodology is based on source-based direct assessment
as described in [7]. We use an updated version of Appraise [14], the same tool which is used in
the human evaluation campaign for the Conference on Machine Translation (WMT).11 See [6] for
more details on last year’s WMT17 results and evaluation.
The main differences to the WMT17 campaign are:
1. Our evaluation is based on quality assessment of translations with respect to the source text,
not a reference translation. To do this, we hire bilingual crowd workers;
2. We enforce full system coverage for the evaluation samples. This means that for every
segment we get human scores for all systems under investigation;
3. We require redundancy so that for every annotation task (also referred to as “HIT” in other
direct assessment publications) we collect scores from three annotators.
The latter two changes have been introduced to strengthen our results, by adding additional
redundancy. Direct assessment as an estimator of general system quality does not require these,
but in the context of achieving human parity, extra layers of fully comparable segment scores
enable more thorough external validation. We intend to release all data related to the final human
parity evaluation campaigns, so this data will become available for independent inspection by the
research community.
11This version of Appraise will also be used to run the WMT18 evaluation campaigns. Source code will be released
to the public in time for WMT18, as in previous years.
15
5.2 Benchmark Translations
We compare our research systems against the following sets of translations. These sets have been
kept stable across all evaluation campaigns, allowing us to track research results over time.
Reference-HT vendor-created human translations of newstest2017. Translators were instructed
to translate from scratch, i.e., without using any online translation engines;12
Reference-PE vendor-created human post-editing output, based on Google Translate machine
translation results;
Reference-WMT Original newstest2017 reference released after WMT17. The original WMT17
reference translation for newstest2017 is known to contain errors, so we decided to add it to
the set of evaluated systems. This allows us to get external validation for the quality of our
two human references;
Online-A-1710 Microsoft Translator production system, collected on October 16, 2017;
Online-B-1710 Google Translate production system, collected on October 16, 2017;
Sogou The Sogou Knowing NMT system, which performed best at last year’s WMT17 Conference
on Machine Translation (WMT) shared task on news translation [42].
Note that the benchmark human references were not available to the system developers. Also,
the presented set of translation systems affects human-perceived quality (both based on the total
number and distribution of quality across systems), so we do not expect scores to be comparable
across campaigns. The question of comparability of raw direct assessment scores over time is an
open research problem still, so we take a conservative approach and do not compare them. Scores
within a single campaign are reliable. We also assume that standardized scores for the same set of
translation systems should be fairly comparable.
5.3 Guarding Against Confounds
Whenever trying to draw a conclusion based on a pair of different translations, we must avoid
measuring the effects of extraneous variables that can confound the experimental variables we
wish to measure [9]. For example, when comparing the translation quality by varying how it is
produced (human translation versus automatic translation), we do not wish our measurements
of translation quality to be influenced by external factors, e.g., perhaps a human translator did
a poor job when translating a few sentences or an automatic translation system happens to be
exceptionally good at translating a particular subset of sentences.
In this work, we specifically control for the effects of several potential extraneous variables:
• Variability of quality measure How sensitive is our quality measure (direct assessment)
to different subsets of the data? We answer this by running redundant evaluation campaigns
across different subsets of the data.
• Test set selection Would we likely obtain the same result on slightly different test data? We
control for this by running redundant large-scale human evaluation campaigns under several
configurations to replicate results (Section 5.4).
• Annotator errors What if some annotators become inattentive, unfairly improving or dam-
aging the score of one system over the other? To control for this effect, we use rejection
sampling when gathering human assessments by occasionally showing annotators examples
where one sentence is intentionally and noticeably worse; annotators that fail to detect these
are excluded from the data, ensuring that human judgments are high quality.
• Annotator inconsistency What if the annotators produce different scores given the same
data? Would using different annotators still lead to the same conclusion? To control for this,
our evaluation campaigns directly include multiple evaluators.
12Of course, there are sentences for which the human translation matches Google Translate or Microsoft Translator
machine translation output. Relative to the overlap for the post-editing-based reference, this is negligible.
16
• Choice of systems Was this particular system combination somehow “lucky”, or would
similar combinations also lead to the same conclusion? To answer this question, we include
multiple system combinations with varying sets of input systems. (Section 5.4)
5.4 Evaluation Campaigns
We conduct the following evaluations:
Annotator variability study To measure this, we repeat the same evaluation campaign three
times. All data is collected on the same subset. We allow annotator overlap but do not
enforce it. In the end, we had a near complete annotator overlap, likely due to the timing of
our campaigns.13 We refer to this as Eval Round 1, on evaluation sample Subset-1;
Data variability study Our data subsets are randomly selected from the source data. Still, the
actual subset could affect results in our favor. To counter this, we conduct three additional
evaluation campaigns on three completely different subsets of data. We refer to this as Eval
Round 2, on evaluation samples Subset-2, Subset-3, and Subset-4.
As the set of systems for all these campaigns does not change, results are theoretically com-
parable, so we can also report synthesized, joint scores, for both dimensions in isolation and in
combined form.
Evaluation campaign parameters are as follows:
• Annotators: 15
• Tasks: 20
• Redundancy: 3
• Tasks per annotator: 4 (about 2 hours of work)
• Systems: 9
• Data points: 4,200 (at least14 466 per system)
The set of systems for the final evaluation campaigns consists of the following systems:
• References: Reference-HT, Reference-PE, Reference-WMT
• Production: Online-A-1710, Online-B-1710
• WMT17: Sogou
• Candidates: Combo-4, Combo-5, Combo-6
After completion of all six evaluation campaigns, we have collected at least 25,200 data points
(i.e., segment scores) or at least 2,520 per system. This is comparable to the amount of annotations
collected for last year’s WMT17 evaluation campaign (2,421 assessments per system). We report
results for individual campaigns and our final synthesized, joint meta-campaign:
Meta-1 We combine assessments from evaluation campaigns Eval Round 1a–c, on evaluation
sample SubsetB, effectively increasing data points by a factor of 3x. Note that this is fair as
result clusters are based on standardized scores which can fairly be computed if all annotators
are exposed to exactly the same segments per system.
While it is also possible to combine data across subsets, we choose not to do this as this po-
tentially affects standardization of annotator scores. For Meta-1, due to the identical assignment
of annotators to segments, we have a guarantee that standardization is reliable.
5.5 Annotator Variability Results
Subset-1, first iteration Table 5a shows the results of our first evaluation round on Subset-
1. Note how our research systems outperform Sogou and both Reference-WMT and
Reference-PE. Based on this clustering it becomes clear that there must be quality issues
with the original Reference-WMT reference. All three systems Combo-4, Combo-5,
and Combo-6 achieve human parity with Reference-HT. We collected at least n ≥ 609
assessments per system.
13To complete so many campaigns in such a short time, it was easier to attract crowd workers when they knew
they could earn more by completing several campaigns. Combined with our reliability testing, this motivation likely
had a positive impact on annotation fidelity and quality.
14Note that as we annotate on unique translation output only, there is a chance that more data points are collected.
17
Subset-1, second iteration Table 5b shows the results for our second evaluation round on
Subset-1. This time, annotators do not see a significant difference between our research
systems and Reference-PE. Consequently, Reference-HTand all three systems Combo-
4, Combo-5, and Combo-6 end up in the same cluster as Reference-PE. All these sys-
tems outperform Sogou and Reference-WMT. As in the previous round, online systems
Online-A-1710 and Online-B-1710 perform worst.
Subset-1, third iteration Table 5c shows the results for our third evaluation round on Subset-
1. Similar to the second round, we do not observe a significant difference between Reference-
PE and our research systems. Again, Reference-HT, all three systems Combo-4, Combo-
5, and Combo-6, and Reference-PE end up in the top cluster. Sogou and Reference-
WMT end in the third cluster, outperforming Online-A-1710 and Online-B-1710.
Again, the latter are not significantly different w.r.t human perceived quality.
5.6 Data Variability Results
Subset-2 Table 5d shows the results for our evaluation on Subset-2. Annotators seem to
have a preference for Reference-HT over Combo-4, Combo-5, and Combo-6, but not
significantly so. All four systems outperform Reference-PE, which itself outperforms all
other systems. Sogou ends up in its own cluster, significantly better than Reference-
WMT and the two online systems Online-A-1710 and Online-B-1710. We collected at
least n ≥ 607 assessments per system.
Subset-3 Table 5e shows the results for our evaluation on Subset-3. This one is interesting as
it is the only evaluation round which shows Reference-PE on top, based on its z score.
Otherwise, we continue to see Reference-HT, Combo-4, Combo-5, and Combo-6 in the
top cluster. Sogou and Reference-WMT are indistinguishable for this subset and both
outperform the two online systems, Online-A-1710 and Online-B-1710. We collected at
least n ≥ 610 assessments per system.
Subset-4 Table 5f shows the results for our evaluation on Subset-4. Again, our research sys-
tems Combo-4, Combo-5, and Combo-6 are indistinguishable from Reference-HT and
Reference-PE. There is no significant difference in quality between these five systems. So-
gou and Reference-WMT outperform the online systems Online-A-1710 and Online-
B-1710. We collected at least n ≥ 649 assessments per system.
18
# Ave % Ave z System # Ave % Ave z System # Ave % Ave z System
1 69.9 0.256 Combo-6 1 68.6 0.233 Reference-HT 1 68.5 0.240 Reference-HT
69.8 0.233 Combo-4 68.6 0.225 Combo-6 68.4 0.229 Combo-6
69.9 0.230 Combo-5 68.6 0.217 Combo-5 68.1 0.201 Combo-5
68.6 0.186 Reference-HT 68.3 0.207 Combo-4 67.7 0.194 Combo-4
67.6 0.129 Reference-PE 67.4 0.154 Reference-PE 66.8 0.141 Reference-PE
2 63.3 -0.095 Sogou 2 61.9 -0.105 Sogou 2 61.8 -0.083 Sogou
62.1 -0.132 Reference-WMT 62.1 -0.113 Reference-WMT 62.0 -0.100 Reference-WMT
3 57.0 -0.383 Online-A-1710 3 55.7 -0.399 Online-A-1710 3 55.2 -0.413 Online-A-1710
54.1 -0.494 Online-B-1710 53.9 -0.468 Online-B-1710 54.3 -0.442 Online-B-1710
(a) Subset-1, n ≥ 609 (b) Subset-1, second iteration (c) Subset-1, third iteration
# Ave % Ave z System # Ave % Ave z System # Ave % Ave z System
1 68.6 0.212 Reference-HT 1 67.4 0.251 Reference-HT 1 66.6 0.254 Reference-HT
68.2 0.200 Combo-5 67.1 0.247 Reference-PE 65.2 0.179 Combo-6
67.9 0.182 Combo-4 65.3 0.147 Combo-6 64.4 0.151 Combo-5
67.9 0.177 Combo-6 64.9 0.106 Combo-4 64.2 0.147 Combo-4
64.3 0.091 Combo-5 63.4 0.127 Reference-PE
2 64.8 0.044 Reference-PE
62.5 -0.061 Sogou 2 61.1 -0.065 Sogou 2 60.5 -0.030 Sogou
59.6 -0.119 Reference-WMT 60.1 -0.074 Reference-WMT
3 59.6 -0.200 Reference-WMT
58.4 -0.277 Online-A-1710 3 55.3 -0.351 Online-A-1710 3 53.4 -0.367 Online-A-1710
55.7 -0.353 Online-B-1710 54.4 -0.377 Online-B-1710 51.7 -0.455 Online-B-1710
(d) Subset-2, n ≥ 607 (e) Subset-3, n ≥ 650 (f) Subset-4, n ≥ 649
# Ave % Ave z System
1 69.0 0.237 Combo-6
68.5 0.220 Reference-HT
68.9 0.216 Combo-5
68.6 0.211 Combo-4
2 67.3 0.141 Reference-PE
3 62.3 -0.094 Sogou
62.1 -0.115 Reference-WMT
4 56.0 -0.398 Online-A-1710
54.1 -0.468 Online-B-1710
(g) Meta-1, n ≥ 1,827
Table 5: Complete results for our three iterations over Subset-1 (5a, 5b, 5c) and our evaluation campaigns for Subset-
2 (5d), Subset-3 (5e), and Subset-4 (5f). We also show results for combined data for Meta-1 (5g) combining annotations
from all iterations over Subset-1. # denotes the ranking cluster, Ave % the averaged raw score r ∈ [0,100], and Ave z
the standardized z score. n ≥ x denotes that we collected at least x assessments per system for the respective evaluation
campaign. All campaigns involved a = 15 annotators. Systems in higher clusters significantly outperform all systems in
lower clusters according to Wilcoxon rank sum test at p-level p ≤ 0.05, following WMT17. Systems in the same cluster are
ordered by z score but considered tied w.r.t. quality.
19
refs=1 refs=2 refs=3
System
WMT PE HT WMT+PE WMT+HT PE+HT WMT+PE+HT
Online-A-1710 24.38 28.82 17.12 36.53 32.17 35.33 41.21
Online-B-1710 33.56 46.97 17.70 56.45 40.55 51.78 59.37
Sogou 26.37 30.69 19.71 38.67 35.47 38.19 44.18
Combo-4 28.30 29.79 20.47 39.53 37.73 38.43 45.62
Combo-5 28.18 29.61 20.48 39.32 37.54 38.15 45.32
Combo-6 28.07 29.90 20.70 39.39 37.77 38.45 45.64
Table 6: BLEU scores against single or multiple references. WMT is Reference-WMT, PE
is Reference-PE, HT is Reference-HT. Scoring based on sacreBLEU v1.2.3, with signa-
ture BLEU+case.mixed+numrefs.1+smooth.exp+tok.13a+version.1.2.3 for refs=1. Signature
changes to numrefs.2 and numrefs.3 for refs=2 and refs=3, respectively. Note how different
scores for Reference-WMT and Reference-PE are compared to Reference-HT and how
these compare to our findings reported in Table 5. This emphasizes the need for human evaluation.
5.7 Data Release
We have released15 all data from the human evaluation campaigns to 1) allow external validation
of our claim of having achieved human parity and 2) to foster future research by releasing two
additional human references for the Reference-WMT test set.
The release package contains the following items:
New references for newstest2017 Two new references for newstest2017, one based on
human translation from scratch (Reference-HT), the other based on human post-editing
(Reference-PE). Table 6 reports the BLEU scores for single and multi reference use with
sacreBLEU;
Human parity translations Output generated by our research systems Combo-4, Combo-5,
and Combo-6;
Online translations Output from online machine translation service Online-A-1710, collected
on October 16, 2017;
Human evaluation data All data points collected in our human evaluation campaigns. This
includes annotations for Subset-1, Subset-2, Subset-3, and Subset-4. We share the
(anonymized) annotator IDs, segment IDs, system IDs, type ID (either TGT or CHK, the
second being a repeated judgment for the first), raw scores r ∈ [0,100], as well as annotation
start and end times.
We do not redistribute the following items:
Reference-WMT test data This is publicly available from the WMT17 website16. In this
work, we used the source newstest2017-zhen-src.zh and the reference (as Reference-
WMT) newstest2017-zhen-ref.en;
Sogou translation This is publicly available from the WMT17 website as well17. We used
newstest2017.SogouKnowing-nmt.5171.zh-en (as Sogou).
The Appraise repository on GitHub18 contains code to recompute result clusters. We share
this data in the hope that the research community might find it useful and also to ensure greatest
possible transparency regarding the generation of the results presented in this paper.
15All Translator human parity data is available here: http://aka.ms/Translator-HumanParityData
16http://data.statmt.org/wmt17/translation-task/test.tgz
17http://data.statmt.org/wmt17/translation-task/wmt17-submitted-data-v1.0.tgz
18https://github.com/cfedermann/Appraise
20
6 Human Analysis
Lastly, a preliminary human error analysis was conducted over the output of the Combo-6 system
(the system that achieved the best results). We randomly sampled 500 sentences and annotated
each translation with whether a specific error type was present. Following [41], we use 9 categories:
Missing Words, Word Repetition, Named Entity, Word Order, Incorrect Words, Unknown Words,
Collocation, Factoid, and Ungrammatical. The Named-Entity category is further subdivided into
Person, Location, Organization, Event, and Other.
Error Category Fraction [%]
Incorrect Words 7.64
Ungrammatical 6.33
Missing Words 5.46
Named Entity 4.38
Person 1.53
Location 1.53
Organization 0.66
Event 0.22
Other 0.44
Word Order 0.87
Factoid 0.66
Word Repetition 0.22
Collocation 0.22
Unknown Words 0
Table 7: Error distribution, as fraction of sentences that contain specific error categories.
Table 7 shows the distribution of the annotated errors as the fraction of sentences containing a
specific error category. The four major error types are Missing words, Incorrect Words, Ungram-
matical, and Named Entity. Each accounts for roughly 5% of errors. This indicates that there is
still room to improve machine translation quality via various approaches, such as modeling Missing
Words [37, 15], integration of high quality data for named-entity translation, as well as domain
and topic adaptation for the issues of incorrect words and ungrammaticality.
7 Discussion and Future Work
In this paper, we described the techniques used in the latest Microsoft machine translation system
to reach a new state-of-the-art. Our evaluation found that our system has reached parity with
professional human translations on the WMT 2017 Chinese to English news task, and exceeds the
quality of crowd-sourced references.
We exploited the dual nature of the translation problem to better utilize parallel data as well
as monolingual data in a more principled way. We utilized joint training of source-to-target, and
target-to-source systems to further improve on the duality of the translation task. We addressed
the exposure bias problem in two ways: by two-pass decoding using Deliberation networks, as well
as by agreement regularization and joint training of left-to-right, right-to-left systems. We trained
a bilingual encoder to obtain bilingual sentence representations used to filter noisy data and select
relevant data. We also found significant gains from combining multiple heterogeneous systems.
We addressed the problem of defining and measuring the quality of human translations and
near-human machine translations. We found that as translation quality has dramatically improved,
automatic reference-based evaluation metrics have become increasingly problematic. We used
direct human annotation to measure the quality of both human and machine translations.
We wish to acknowledge the tremendous progress in sequence-to-sequence modeling made by
the entire research community that paved the road for this achievement. We have introduced a
few new approaches that helped us to reach human parity for WMT2017 Chinese to English news
translation task. At the same time, much work remains to be done, especially in domains and
language-pairs that do not benefit from huge amounts of available data.
21
References
[1] Artetxe, M., Labaka, G., Agirre, E., and Cho, K. Unsupervised neural machine
translation. In International Conference on Learning Representations (2018).
[2] Axelrod, A., He, X., and Gao, J. Domain adaptation via pseudo in-domain data selec-
tion. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2011), EMNLP ’11, Association for Computational Linguistics,
pp. 355–362.
[3] Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., and Bengio, Y. Neural machine translation by jointly learning
to align and translate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473 (2014).
[4] Belinkov, Y., and Bisk, Y. Synthetic and natural noise both break neural machine trans-
lation. CoRR abs/1711.02173 (2017).
[5] Bengio, S., Vinyals, O., Jaitly, N., and Shazeer, N. Scheduled sampling for sequence
prediction with recurrent neural networks. In NIPS (2015), pp. 1171–1179.
[6] Bojar, O., Chatterjee, R., Federmann, C., Graham, Y., Haddow, B., Huang,
S., Huck, M., Koehn, P., Liu, Q., Logacheva, V., Monz, C., Negri, M., Post,
M., Rubino, R., Specia, L., and Turchi, M. Findings of the 2017 conference on ma-
chine translation (wmt17). In Proceedings of the Second Conference on Machine Translation,
Volume 2: Shared Task Papers (Copenhagen, Denmark, September 2017), Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 169–214.
[7] Cettolo, M., Federico, M., Bentivogli, L., Niehues, J., Stüker, S., Sudoh, K.,
Yoshino, K., and Federmann, C. Overview of the iwslt 2017 evaluation campaign. In
Proceedings of the 14th International Workshop on Spoken Language Translation (IWSLT)
(Tokyo, Japan, December 2017), IWSLT, pp. 2–12.
[8] Cherry, C., and Foster, G. Batch tuning strategies for statistical machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 2012 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2012),
NAACL HLT ’12, Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 427–436.
[9] Clark, J. H., Dyer, C., Lavie, A., and Smith, N. A. Better hypothesis testing for sta-
tistical machine translation: Controlling for optimizer instability. In Proceedings of the 49th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies: short papers-Volume 2 (2011), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 176–181.
[10] Denkowski, M., and Lavie, A. Meteor 1.3: Automatic Metric for Reliable Optimization
and Evaluation of Machine Translation Systems. In Proceedings of the EMNLP 2011 Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation (2011).
[11] Devlin, J. Sharp models on dull hardware: Fast and accurate neural machine translation
decoding on the cpu. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (Copenhagen, Denmark, September 2017), Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pp. 2810–2815.
[12] Dreyer, M., and Marcu, D. HyTER: Meaning-Equivalent Semantics for Translation
Evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2012 Conference of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (2012), Association
for Computational Linguistics, pp. 162–171.
[13] Edgington, E. S. Validity of Randomization Tests for One-subject Experiments. Journal
of Educational Statistics 5, 3 (1980), 235–251.
[14] Federmann, C. Appraise: An open-source toolkit for manual evaluation of machine trans-
lation output. The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics 98 (September 2012), 25–35.
[15] Feng, S., Liu, S., Yang, N., Li, M., Zhou, M., and Zhu, K. Q. Improving attention
modeling with implicit distortion and fertility for machine translation. In COLING 2016,
26th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Proceedings of the Conference:
Technical Papers, December 11-16, 2016, Osaka, Japan (2016), pp. 3082–3092.
22
[16] Gehring, J., Auli, M., Grangier, D., Yarats, D., and Dauphin, Y. N. Convolutional
sequence to sequence learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03122 (2017).
[17] Graham, Y., Baldwin, T., Moffat, A., and Zobel, J. Can machine translation
systems be evaluated by the crowd alone? Natural Language Engineering, 23(1), 3-30.
doi:10.1017/S1351324915000339 (2016).
[18] Gu, J., Hassan, H., Devlin, J., and Li, V. Universal neural machine translation for
extremely low resource languages.
[19] Hassan, H., Elaraby, M., and Tawfik, A. Y. Synthetic data for neural machine trans-
lation of spoken-dialects.
[20] He, D., Xia, Y., Qin, T., Wang, L., Yu, N., Liu, T., and Ma, W.-Y. Dual learning for
machine translation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2016), pp. 820–
828.
[21] He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep residual learning for image recognition.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03385 (2015).
[22] Johnson, M., Schuster, M., Le, Q. V., Krikun, M., Wu, Y., Chen, Z., Thorat,
N., Viégas, F., Wattenberg, M., Corrado, G., et al. Google’s multilingual neural
machine translation system: enabling zero-shot translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.04558
(2016).
[23] Kingma, D. P., and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. CoRR
abs/1412.6980 (2014).
[24] Lample, G., Conneau, A., Denoyer, L., and Ranzato, M. Unsupervised machine
translation using monolingual corpora only. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations (2018).
[25] Lin, J., Xia, Y., Qin, T., Chen, Z., and Liu, T.-Y. Conditional image-to-image transla-
tion. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (July
2018).
[26] Luo, P., Wang, G., Lin, L., and Wang, X. Deep dual learning for semantic image
segmentation. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2017, Venice,
Italy, October 22-29, 2017 (2017), pp. 2737–2745.
[27] Mann, H. B., and Whitney, D. R. On a test of whether one of two random variables is
stochastically larger than the other. The annals of mathematical statistics (1947), 50–60.
[28] Moore, R. C., and Lewis, W. Intelligent selection of language model training data.
In Proceedings of the ACL 2010 Conference Short Papers (Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2010),
ACLShort ’10, Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 220–224.
[29] Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.-J. Bleu: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting on association
for computational linguistics (2002), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 311–318.
[30] Sennrich, R., Haddow, B., and Birch, A. Improving neural machine translation models
with monolingual data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06709 (2015).
[31] Sennrich, R., Haddow, B., and Birch, A. Neural machine translation of rare words with
subword units. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.07909 (2015).
[32] Shen, W., and Liu, R. Learning residual images for face attribute manipulation. In
2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2017), IEEE,
pp. 1225–1233.
[33] Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., Sifre, L., Driessche, G. V. D.,
Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Panneershelvam, V., Lanctot, M., and et al.
Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, vol. 529, pp.
484489 (2016).
23
[34] Snover, M., Dorr, B., Schwartz, R., Micciulla, L., and Makhoul, J. A study
of translation edit rate with targeted human annotation. In Proceedings of association for
machine translation in the Americas (2006), vol. 200.
[35] Sutskever, I., Vinyals, O., and Le, Q. V. Sequence to sequence learning with neural
networks. NIPS (2014).
[36] Tang, D., Duan, N., Qin, T., and Zhou, M. Question answering and question generation
as dual tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02027 (2017).
[37] Tu, Z., Lu, Z., Liu, Y., Liu, X., and Li, H. Modeling coverage for neural machine
translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.04811 (2016).
[38] van der Wees, M., Bisazza, A., and Monz, C. Dynamic data selection for neural machine
translation. CoRR abs/1708.00712 (2017).
[39] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N.,
Kaiser, L., and Polosukhin, I. Attention is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03762
(2017).
[40] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N.,
Kaiser, L., and Polosukhin, I. Attention is all you need. In NIPS (2017).
[41] Vilar, D., Xu, J., D’Haro, L. F., and Ney, H. Error analysis of statistical machine trans-
lation output. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation, LREC 2006, Genoa, Italy, May 22-28, 2006. (2006), pp. 697–702.
[42] Wang, Y., Cheng, S., Jiang, L., Yang, J., Chen, W., Li, M., Shi, L., Wang, Y.,
and Yang, H. Sogou neural machine translation systems for WMT17. In Proceedings of the
Second Conference on Machine Translation, WMT 2017, Copenhagen, Denmark, September
7-8, 2017 (2017), pp. 410–415.
[43] Wang, Y., Li, X., Cheng, S., Jiang, L., Yang, J., Chen, W., Shi, L., Wang, Y., and
Yang, H. Sogou neural machine translation systems for wmt17. In Proceedings of the Second
Conference on Machine Translation, Volume 2: Shared Task Papers (Copenhagen, Denmark,
September 2017), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 410–415.
[44] Wang, Y., Xia, Y., Zhao, L., Bian, J., Qin, T., Liu, G., and Liu, T. Dual transfer
learning for neural machine translation with marginal distribution regularization. In AAAI
(2018).
[45] Wilcoxon, F. Individual Comparisons by Ranking Methods. Biometrics Bulletin 1, 6 (1945),
80–83.
[46] Wu, Y., Schuster, M., Chen, Z., Le, Q. V., Norouzi, M., Macherey, W., Krikun,
M., Cao, Y., Gao, Q., Macherey, K., Klingner, J., Shah, A., Johnson, M., Liu,
X., Kaiser, Ł., Gouws, S., Kato, Y., Kudo, T., Kazawa, H., Stevens, K., Kurian,
G., Patil, N., Wang, W., Young, C., Smith, J., Riesa, J., Rudnick, A., Vinyals, O.,
Corrado, G., Hughes, M., and Dean, J. Google’s Neural Machine Translation System:
Bridging the Gap between Human and Machine Translation. ArXiv e-prints (Sept. 2016).
[47] Xia, Y., Bian, J., Qin, T., Yu, N., and Liu, T.-Y. Dual inference for machine learning.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
IJCAI-17 (2017), pp. 3112–3118.
[48] Xia, Y., Qin, T., Chen, W., Bian, J., Yu, N., and Liu, T. Dual supervised learning. In
Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney,
NSW, Australia, 6-11 August 2017 (2017), pp. 3789–3798.
[49] Xia, Y., Tian, F., Wu, L., Lin, J., Qin, T., Yu, N., and Liu, T.-Y. Deliberation
networks: Sequence generation beyond one-pass decoding. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (2017), pp. 1782–1792.
24
[50] Xiong, W., Droppo, J., Huang, X., Seide, F., Seltzer, M. L., Stolcke, A., Yu,
D., and Zweig, G. Toward human parity in conversational speech recognition. IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing 25, 12 (2017), 2410–2423.
[51] Yi, Z., Zhang, H., Tan, P., and Gong, M. Dualgan: Unsupervised dual learning for
image-to-image translation. ICCV (2017).
[52] Zhang, Z., Liu, S., Li, M., Zhou, M., and Chen, E. Joint training for neural machine
translation models with monolingual data, 2018.
[53] Zhu, J.-Y., Park, T., Isola, P., and Efros, A. A. Unpaired image-to-image translation
using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.10593 (2017).
[54] Zoph, B., Yuret, D., May, J., and Knight, K. Transfer learning for low-resource neural
machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.02201 (2016).
25
